Digital forensics is relevant at all stages of the incident response life cycle.
During the preparation phase,
having a plan and resources lined up in case you need digital forensics is key.
Also during the middle steps of detection, analysis, containment,
eradication and recovery, digital forensics can help
incident teams understand what has happened during an incident in order to manage it.
Finally, where this is most heavily used is in the post-incident activity.
The point of digital forensics is all about evidence and so if
you plan to pursue legal or other actions,
especially after a breach,
digital forensics is critical.
Digital forensics helps shed light on what happened.
What did the attacker access?
What actions did they take?
How can you prove this?
So the process involves identifying,
preserving, analyzing, and reporting on evidence.
First is identifying.
This is the practice of finding and collecting
the suspected original source or assets believed to contain evidence.
For example, an investigator may pinpoint
suspicious activity from an IP address that's assigned to an employee's laptop.
So the digital forensics investigator may have
a co-worker send them the suspected laptop for analysis.
Next is preserving.
This is the practice of ensuring the integrity of
the collected evidence and preserving a digital trail of the data or media.
For example, it's essential to monitor how assets and
any copies of data have been handled since being taken from the environment,
along with who had access.
You can also monitor tampering with official seals,
file hashing, and other means to help check integrity.
This also includes making sure that evidence isn't destroyed through
adverse conditions such as overheating or water moisture damage.
Then comes analyzing.
This is the investigative portion of
the process where a forensics expert begins to look into
the acquired assets or the media's data to find
evidence of the suspected crime or incident that has happened.
For example, the investigator may look through documents,
e-mails, and chat conversations,
browser website history, hard drives,
downloads on the computer and other user activities to find more clues.
Finally, you do reporting.
This is the process of creating a report of findings from
the investigation for presentation to stakeholders and in some cases,
an attorney or jury in court.
Reporting has to be tailored to the audience.
In a court case where the jury is not technically savvy,
findings should be explained in a way that are easy to understand for everyone
because failure to do so could make even the most incriminating evidence ineffective.
Those are the four steps in the digital forensics process.